- [Instructor] Every Spring-based application
is a Java application.
So it is essential for a Spring developer to be comfortable
with the basics of how JVM performance works.
There is a lot to know.
The JVM is a complicated discipline.
At the same time, it is approachable,
and even a basic knowledge about the JVM
will pay many rewards
in your understanding of your application.
In this video,
we will examine the essentials of JVM performance.
We will cover the heap performance and CPU performance.
We will put an emphasis on the practical skills
of modifying, monitoring, and reporting on these metrics.
The heap, in green there,
in the diagram, holds all of our objects.
Every time you call new to make a new instance of an object
in your application, it will live on the heap.
This is where the memory management happens
that you need to care about.
The heap is where garbage collection happens.
Garbage collection is how Java reclaims the space
on the heap for objects that are no longer needed
by your application,
and that no longer need to take up memory space.
You can influence heap behavior.
You can set max and min heap sizes to influence
how your application performs on the host computer.
The other thing we're going to talk about is CPU performance.
CPU performance is the use
of the host computer's processing resources
to execute your Java code.
It's what's reflected in CPU performance.
There's very little as a developer that you can do
to influence CPU performance,
but understanding your needs and limitations
will help you make informed decisions
about your application design.
We are going to use a tool called VisualVM
in order to get insight into our demo application,
and explore heap and CPU performance.
VisualVM is bundled with JDK through Java 8.
It's also available as a standalone download
from a GitHub-hosted site.
So let's hop in here and have a look
at some actual JVM performance things.
We're going to do this by launching our demo application
in a baseline mode.
And what I want you to know here is VisualVM will reflect
to you every information about every Java application
that's running currently on your system.
That includes VisualVM itself, of course.
That includes our IntelliJ IDE,
but right here on the list,
you will see it's specifically our demo application.
And when we open our demo application,
the first thing we will see here in VisualVM is a overview
of the application itself with a bunch
of static information.
The process ID comes in handy
if you ever have to kill the application
for some reason manually.
This is telling us something
about the JVM arguments that we've passed in.
These arguments here are specifically coming from IntelliJ.
Also, a list of your system properties that impact
your runtime, you have Java, then Java vendor, JVM version,
and just system-wide things like operating system
and user information and such.
So that's the Static tab, actually,
a wealth of resources there that you should understand,
but the real interesting stuff here
in VisualVM is this monitor tab.
The monitor gives us a nice quick look
at the critical parts of the whole system,
many of which we discussed on the slides a minute ago.
Upper left, you see CPU usage, okay,
and here, you'll see that we're hardly doing anything.
Our demo app is actually computing nothing.
And so that's why our CPU usage down here
is zero all the way across.
Below CPU, you can see information
about the classes that are loaded.
Now these are the classes themselves,
not the instances of classes.
So this tells us that our application is requiring the use
of nearly 12,000 classes to do its work.
And then very closely related to this class's output
is the Metaspace tab up here.
The Metaspace is not memory that we're going to discuss.
Metaspace is where your class information is held.
You can't influence the size of this.
It will grow and shrink as it wants to,
according to how many classes are being loaded,
and you want to see it mostly full all of the time.
That's good and normal,
meaning the blue bar is up close to the orange bar,
which is your maximum.
The JVM will take care of that stuff for you.
The heap here is what's interesting.
So the heap is what we discussed before,
where all of your objects live,
all of the instances of your objects.
A couple of things to notice here
are we did not set any size information
from our JVM input parameters to influence heap size,
and so, the JVM picked its own size
based on a percentage of what's available on your system.
And then finally,
the fourth panel here on the monitor tab is information
about the threads that you have running.
Again, since we're doing very little work
in our demo baseline application,
the number of threads here are quite stable.
These are mostly Spring-initiated threads
that are running here.
Okay, one more thing I'd like to show you
on the heap here is a garbage collection right here
in VisualVM.
You can perform a garbage collection,
and watch what happens here,
how performing a garbage collection manually drives down
the references on the heap
to classes that are no longer needed.
And it also allows the JVM to drop the size
of the heap down here to 100 megs,
because it no longer feels that it needs all 300
of those megs to accommodate yourself.
Let's have a look at this Threads tab.
This Threads tab will show us details of all
of these 20 threads here that we see in this panel.
And it gives us information about the state
of all of the threads that are supporting the application.
Finally, the Sampler tab,
we'll have a look at this in a minute,
allows us to get more detail,
that information about our CPO and our memory.
Now let's have a little more fun with this,
that we've had an overview of VisualVM,
and let's stop our application,
and let's start it in a different mode,
which I've called VisualVM here in Application Properties.
And let's also add to our JVM runtime indications
of how big we want that heap to be.
We can set that in our application itself,
and we're going to do that here.
We're going to set a max size of 100 meg
and a min size of 100 also.
It's very common to see, especially in production systems,
that you set your max and your min to be the same.
Let's see, OK here.
Let's rerun our application.
VisualVM will, did you see that flash up there,
will automatically pull in a running application.
First of all, in the Overview tab,
you can see these additional arguments that we added.
Just a moment to go.
On the Monitor tab, now,
we're actually showing some interesting things.
We've got some threads running,
doing some sort of pretend work there
in the demo application.
And we've got things being put up and down on the heap here
that you can get a little more sense
of what a real application would look like.
We can perform a garbage collection here.
But now notice that even though we collected
a little bit of memory,
the heap size remained the same
because of the way we influenced it at the JVM input side.
Let's have a look here at our Threads tab, though.
This is really what you want to see.
On our threads now,
we have some threads that our application
has self-initiated.
This gives you a better indication of, in real life,
how you can see the threads that you create
in your application, and surface them here in VisualVM.
This button allowed me to see the histogram
for the threads over all time,
so you can see the life cycle
of the threads in our demo application.
Also, we can have a very clear look
at what's happening on our heap space.
What's on the heap, what's on the heap by thread,
same thing with CPU, what's happening in the CPU,
and what's happening in the CPU by thread.
So that's a little bit of information about VisualVM,
how to monitor the health of your Java application runtime,
and how to monitor your application
at runtime using VisualVM.
There's so much more to learn here,
but with the fluency on these basics of JVM performance,
it's within reach for any Spring developer
to understand and improve the performance
of your Spring application.
Now that we've taken the important step
of breaking down the complexity of the problem,
please continue with me
as we start building our Spring performance skills.